Welcome, guys and girls, to this lecture.
In this lecture, we're going to answer the million dollar question.
What is Docker container?
All right.
Let's try to understand this with an actual example.
So you are the almighty happy developer and you develop some code for your project in development environment
and the runtime engine for your development environment is Python 3.8 and you are importing a couple
of dependencies, maybe requests and maybe kitchen sink.
And you also have a configuration file with the DNS Tavis Name and the database connection.
So everything works great in the development environment.
Then you move your code to the test environment.
In the test environment, the runtime engine is Python 3.6.
So one of your code dependency works, but the other one, maybe the kitchen sink one breaks and your
configuration file the format, it also works.
So you are thinking, all right, I need to change the code a little bit.
I guess that's okay.
Then one fine day your code gets moved into prod.
So prod runtime engine generally is always behind.
So in prod your company is running Python 2.7, so they're both of your dependencies.
Break the configuration file breaks and basically your code is crashing and burning at this point.
So you are thinking, why did I take this job?
So at this point, there are two kinds of developers.
No judgment here.
One kind of developer says, Hey, it worked fine in Dev.
It's not working in production.
Not my problem, it's the operations problem.
The other kind of developers think it works on my machine.
It works on development environment.
What if I can package whatever my code needs to run in any environment and then ship that whole package
into production?
So one of the developer who thought like this is Solomon Hikes and that's how Docker Container was born
in 2013.
So what is a container?
A container is an atomic self contained package of software that includes everything it needs to run
code, runtime, libraries, packages, etc..
Before we go further, a lot of the folks are confused about the term Docker image versus container,
so let's clear it up.
So once you package your code configuration dependencies and runtime engine, you create a Docker image,
also known as container image.
At this point, your application is not running, you just have the image of your application.
And when you run the Docker image or container image, it creates a container.
So let's understand the big picture.
So this slide is very important.
Make sure you understand the flow.
So in the beginning you have your app, maybe it's running Java or Python or any other language.
And then we have this file called Docker file, which Docker arises your app.
So this Docker file basically says my application needs this dependencies, this configuration, this
runtime.
It also has a command to create the Docker image for your application.
So once you have the Docker image, you have to save the Docker image somewhere.
So that is called repository.
So this is very similar to when you save your jar file for your Java application in a repository.
So a couple of popular Docker image repository are Docker hub and Elastic Container Registry.
Then your Docker image gets deployed into container.
So this is when your app starts running inside the container.
So one thing to note at this point, you can really run your application as container in any platform
that supports Docker.
So one of the most popular platform to run your container is Kubernetes.
And Kubernetes has different flavors.
So we of course, has Amazon X, which is the most popular, and we also have Google Kubernetes engine.
But since Kubernetes is open source, you can install Kubernetes on vanilla ESI tools and run your container
there.
And that's not it.
You can run into any Kubernetes cluster implementation even on prem.
So this also comes up a lot in interviews.
And also this is important to understand what is the difference between virtual machine such as AC tools
versus containers?
So containers and virtual machines have some similarity in resource isolation, but it functions differently.
So virtual machines are an abstraction of physical hardware.
Turning one server into many servers, the hypervisor allows multiple VMs to run on a single machine.
But here the VM has your application, the libraries and runtimes, but it also has to have a guest
operating system.
And this guest operating system takes up tens of gigabytes of space.
Also, this operating system can be slow to boot.
So now if we take a look into container, containers are an abstraction at the application layer that
packages code and dependencies together, multiple containers can run.
On the same machine and share the operating system kernel with other containers.
So since in this case we don't need to package up a guest operating system into our container, it takes
way less space than your VM.
So that's why even though the size of the underlying server is same for these two diagrams, I have
put way more containers than the VM.
So what are some of the advantages of Docker container?
So since you are packaging everything you need to run your code.
It is platform independent.
It's truly build it once and run it anywhere.
So let's go back to our side developer.
So instead of him just deploying the code in different environment with different runtime engines.
Now he got smarter.
He packaged his code.
His runtime engine, which is Python 3.8, his dependencies and any other necessary components into
a Docker image.
And that Docker image runs seamlessly in dev test and production.
So his life is great again.
OC Going back to the advantages of Docker container, next advantage is better resource utilization
since containers do not require a separate operating system.
They use much less resources than VMM.
This makes it possible to run many more containers than VMs on a single server, and since containers
have a higher utilisation level with regards to underlying hardware, you require less hardware resulting
in a reduction of costs.
Next advantage is application isolation.
Although containers run on the same server, they are isolated from each other.
If one application crashes, other containers will keep running flawlessly and don't experience any
technical problems.
This isolation also decreases security risks if one application is hacked or breached by malware.
Any negative effects will not spread to the other running containers.
Containers are fast to create, replicate or destroy.
As mentioned before, containers are lightweight and start very, very quickly because they do not need
an operating system boot.
What this means is your application can scale very, very quickly.
The last but not the least advantage is container orchestration.
Problem is solved.
There are many great container orchestrator available today in the market that does a lot of heavy lifting,
allowing you to focus on the business.
Which brings us to the next question.
What the heck is container orchestrator?
All right, guys and girls join me in the next lecture to find answer to that question.